[Docs] Add dedicated page for Split Keyboard information (#5802)
qmk/qmk_firmware: docs/feature_split_keyboard.md

# Split Keyboard 

> Many keyboards in QMK Firmware's repo are "split" keyboards. Meaning, they use two controllers, one plugging into USB, and the second connected by a serial or an I<sup>2</sup>C connection over a TRRS or similar cable. 

Reviewer: I don't like how this is worded.

```suggestion
Many keyboards in the QMK Firmware repo are "split" keyboards. They use two controllers—one plugging into USB, and the second connected by a serial or an I<sup>2</sup>C connection over a TRRS or similar cable. 
```

> Split keyboards can have a lot of benefits, but there are some additional work to get them enabled.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Split keyboards can have a lot of benefits, but there is some additional work needed to get them enabled.  
```

QMK Firmware has a generic implementation that is usable by any board, as well as numerous board specific implementations. 

> For this, we will mostly be talking about the generic implementation used by the Lets Split and other keyboards. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this, we will mostly be talking about the generic implementation used by the Let's Split and other keyboards. 
```

## Hardware Configuration

> This assumes that you're using two Pro Micro compatible controllers, and are using TRRS jacks to connect to two halves. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This assumes that you're using two Pro Micro-compatible controllers, and are using TRRS jacks to connect to two halves. 
```

### Required Hardware

> Apart from diodes and key switches for the keyboard matrix in each half, you will need 2x TRRS sockets and 1x TRRS cable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apart from diodes and key switches for the keyboard matrix in each half, you will need 2x TRRS sockets and 1x TRRS cable.
```

Reviewer 2: Might need some visual explanation as to what a TRRS cable is.

Alternatively, you can use any sort of cable and socket that has at least 3 wires. 

> If you want to use I2C to communicate between halves, you will need a cable with at least 4 wires and 2x 4.7kΩ pull-up resistors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use I<sup>2</sup>C to communicate between halves, you will need a cable with at least 4 wires and 2x 4.7kΩ pull-up resistors.
```

### Serial Wiring

The 3 wires of the TRS/TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and D0 (aka PDO or pin 3) between the two Pro Micros. 

> ?> Note that pin used here is actually set by `SOFT_SERIAL_PIN` below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
?> Note that the pin used here is actually set by `SOFT_SERIAL_PIN` below.
```

![serial wiring](https://i.imgur.com/C3D1GAQ.png)

> ### I2C Wiring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### I<sup>2</sup>C Wiring
```

> The 4 wires of the TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and SLC and SDA (aka PD0/pin 3 and PD1/pin 2, respectively) between the two Pro Micros. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The 4 wires of the TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and SCL and SDA (aka PD0/pin 3 and PD1/pin 2, respectively) between the two Pro Micros. 
```

The pull-up resistors may be placed on either half. It is also possible
to use 4 resistors and have the pull-ups in both halves, but this is
unnecessary in simple use cases.

![i2c wiring](https://i.imgur.com/Hbzhc6E.png)

## Firmware Configuration

To enable the split keyboard feature, add the following to your `rules.mk`: 

```make
SPLIT_KEYBOARD = yes
```

If you're using a custom transport (communication method), then you will also need to add: 

```make
SPLIT_TRANSPORT = custom
```

### Setting Handedness

> By default, the firmware does not know what side is which.  It needs some help to determine that. And there are several ways to do this.  And they are listed in order of precedence. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the firmware does not know which side is which; it needs some help to determine that. There are several ways to do this, listed in order of precedence.
```

#### Handedness by Pin

You can configure the firmware to read a pin on the controller to determine handedness.  To do this, add the following to your `config.h` file:

```c
#define SPLIT_HAND_PIN B7
```

This will read the specified pin. If it's high, then the controller assumes it is the left hand, and if it's low, it's assumed to be the right side. 

#### Handedness by EEPROM

> This method sets the and reads the handedness by using the EEPROM (persistent storage of the controller). 

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: Yeah, I need to rewrite this part.

> To set enable this method, add the following to your `config.h` file: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable this method, add the following to your `config.h` file: 
```

```c
#define EE_HANDS
```

> However, you'll have to flash the eeprom files for the correct hand to each controller.  You can do this manually, or there are targets for avrdude and dfu to do this, while flashing the firmware: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, you'll have to flash the EEPROM files for the correct hand to each controller.  You can do this manually, or there are targets for avrdude and dfu to do this, while flashing the firmware: 
```

* `:avrdude-split-left`
* `:avrdude-split-right`
* `:dfu-split-left`
* `:dfu-split-right`

> If you reset the eeprom outside of the firmeware's built in options (such as using the QMK Toolbox's "reset EEPROM" option), you'll need to re-flash the EEPROM files. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you reset the EEPROM outside of the firmeware's built in options (such as using the QMK Toolbox's "Reset EEPROM" option), you'll need to re-flash the EEPROM files. 
```

> If you reset the EEPROM outside of the firmeware's built in options (such as using the QMK Toolbox's "Reset EEPROM" option), you'll need to re-flash the EEPROM files. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you reset the EEPROM outside of the firmware's built in options (such as using the QMK Toolbox's "Reset EEPROM" option), you'll need to re-flash the EEPROM files. 
```

You can find the EEPROM files in the QMK firmware repo, [here](https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/tree/master/quantum/split_common). 

> #### Handedness by define

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Handedness by `#define`
```

You can set the handedness at compile time.  This is done by adding the following to your `config.h` file:

```c
#define MASTER_RIGHT
```

or 

```c
#define MASTER_LEFT
```

Or by not defining any of these options (which defaults to `MASTER_LEFT`, in this case. 

> ### Communication options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Communication Options
```

Because not every split keyboard is identical, there are a number of additional options that can be configured in your `config.h` file.

```c
#define USE_I2C
```

This enables I<sup>2</sup>C support for split keyboards. This isn't strictly for communication, but can be used for OLED or other I<sup>2</sup>C based devices. 

```c
#define SOFT_SERIAL_PIN D0
```

This sets the pin to be used for serial communication. If you're not using serial, you shouldn't need to define this. 

```c

> #define SELECT_SOFT_SERIAL_SPEED {#}` 

Reviewer 3: extra `

```

> If you're having issues with serial communication, you can change this value, as it controls the communication speed for serial.  It defaults to 1, but the possible values are: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're having issues with serial communication, you can change this value, as it controls the communication speed for serial.  The default is 1, and the possible values are:
```

>     * __0__: about 189kbps (Experimental only)

Reviewer 3: this bit seems formatted wrong. Maybe an extra space.

Author: Yeah, it was.  Need to fix.

    * __1__: about 137kbps (default)
    * __2__: about 75kbps
    * __3__: about 39kbps
    * __4__: about 26kbps
    * __5__: about 20kbps

###  Hardware Configuration Options

There are some settings that you may need to configure, based on how the hardware is set up. 

```c
#define MATRIX_ROW_PINS_RIGHT { <row pins> }
#define MATRIX_COL_PINS_RIGHT { <col pins> }
```

> This allows you to specify a different set of pins for the matrix on the right side.  This is useful, if you have a board that the halves are very differently shaped, and need different configurations (such as Keebio's Quefrency keyboard).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows you to specify a different set of pins for the matrix on the right side.  This is useful if you have a board with differently-shaped halves that requires a different configuration (such as Keebio's Quefrency).
```

```c
#define RGBLED_SPLIT { 6, 6 }
```

> This lets set how many LEDs are connected to each controller. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This sets how many LEDs are connected to each controller.
```

Was trying to think how to word that better but :man_shrugging:

!> ARM is not yet supported for Split Keyboards.  Progress is being made, but we are not quite there, yet. 

## Hardware Configuration

This assumes that you're using two Pro Micro-compatible controllers, and are using TRRS jacks to connect to two halves. 

### Required Hardware

Apart from diodes and key switches for the keyboard matrix in each half, you will need 2x TRRS sockets and 1x TRRS cable.

Alternatively, you can use any sort of cable and socket that has at least 3 wires. 

If you want to use I<sup>2</sup>C to communicate between halves, you will need a cable with at least 4 wires and 2x 4.7kΩ pull-up resistors.

### Serial Wiring

The 3 wires of the TRS/TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and D0 (aka PDO or pin 3) between the two Pro Micros. 

?> Note that the pin used here is actually set by `SOFT_SERIAL_PIN` below.

![serial wiring](https://i.imgur.com/C3D1GAQ.png)

### I<sup>2</sup>C Wiring

The 4 wires of the TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and SCL and SDA (aka PD0/pin 3 and PD1/pin 2, respectively) between the two Pro Micros. 

The pull-up resistors may be placed on either half. It is also possible

> to use 4 resistors and have the pull-ups in both halves, but this is

Reviewer 2: No wrapping here.

Author: Woops, will fix that up!

To enable this method, add the following to your `config.h` file: 

```c
#define EE_HANDS
```

However, you'll have to flash the EEPROM files for the correct hand to each controller.  You can do this manually, or there are targets for avrdude and dfu to do this, while flashing the firmware: 

* `:avrdude-split-left`
* `:avrdude-split-right`
* `:dfu-split-left`
* `:dfu-split-right`

This setting is not changed when re-initializing the EEPROM using the `EEP_RST` key, or using the `eeconfig_init()` function.  However, if you reset the EEPROM outside of the firmware's built in options (such as flashing a file that overwrites the `EEPROM`, like how the [QMK Toolbox]()'s "Reset EEPROM" button works), you'll need to re-flash the controller with the `EEPROM` files. 

You can find the `EEPROM` files in the QMK firmware repo, [here](https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/tree/master/quantum/split_common). 

#### Handedness by `#define`

You can set the handedness at compile time.  This is done by adding the following to your `config.h` file:

```c
#define MASTER_RIGHT
```

or 

```c
#define MASTER_LEFT
```

> Or by not defining any of these options (which defaults to `MASTER_LEFT`, in this case. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If neither are defined, the handedness defaults to `MASTER_LEFT`.
```

### Communication Options

Because not every split keyboard is identical, there are a number of additional options that can be configured in your `config.h` file.

```c
#define USE_I2C
```

> This enables I<sup>2</sup>C support for split keyboards. This isn't strictly for communication, but can be used for OLED or other I<sup>2</sup>C based devices. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enables I<sup>2</sup>C support for split keyboards. This isn't strictly for communication, but can be used for OLED or other I<sup>2</sup>C-based devices. 
```

```c
#define SOFT_SERIAL_PIN D0
```

This sets the pin to be used for serial communication. If you're not using serial, you shouldn't need to define this. 

```c
#define SELECT_SOFT_SERIAL_SPEED {#}`
```

If you're having issues with serial communication, you can change this value, as it controls the communication speed for serial.  The default is 1, and the possible values are:

* **`0`**: about 189kbps (Experimental only)
* **`1`**: about 137kbps (default)
* **`2`**: about 75kbps
* **`3`**: about 39kbps
* **`4`**: about 26kbps
* **`5`**: about 20kbps

###  Hardware Configuration Options

There are some settings that you may need to configure, based on how the hardware is set up. 

```c
#define MATRIX_ROW_PINS_RIGHT { <row pins> }
#define MATRIX_COL_PINS_RIGHT { <col pins> }
```

This allows you to specify a different set of pins for the matrix on the right side.  This is useful if you have a board with differently-shaped halves that requires a different configuration (such as Keebio's Quefrency).

```c
#define RGBLIGHT_SPLIT
```

> This option enables synchronization of the RGB Light modes between the controllers of the split Keyboard.  This is for keyboards that have RGB LEDs that are directly wired to the controller (aka, that are not using the "extra data" option on the TRRS cable)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This option enables synchronization of the RGB Light modes between the controllers of the split keyboard.  This is for keyboards that have RGB LEDs that are directly wired to the controller (that is, they are not using the "extra data" option on the TRRS cable).
```

This assumes that you're using two Pro Micro-compatible controllers, and are using TRRS jacks to connect to two halves. 

### Required Hardware

Apart from diodes and key switches for the keyboard matrix in each half, you will need 2x TRRS sockets and 1x TRRS cable.

Alternatively, you can use any sort of cable and socket that has at least 3 wires. 

If you want to use I<sup>2</sup>C to communicate between halves, you will need a cable with at least 4 wires and 2x 4.7kΩ pull-up resistors.

#### Considerations 

The most commonly used connection is a TRRS cable and jacks.  These provide 4 wires, making them very useful for split keyboards, and are easy to find. 

However, since one of the wires carries VCC, this means that the boards are not hot pluggable. You should always disconnect the board from USB before unplugging and plugging in TRRS cables, or you can short the controller, or worse. 

Another option is to use phone cables (as in, old school RJ-11/RJ-14 cables). Make sure that you use one that actually supports 4 wires/lanes.  

However, USB cables, SATA cables, and even just 4 wires have been known to be used for communication between the controllers. 

> !> Using USB Cables for communication between the controllers works just fine. But you could plug in a normal USB cable here and short out the keyboard, depending on how it's wired.  We would not recommend using USB cables for communication, for this reason. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!> Using USB cables for communication between the controllers works just fine, but the connector could be mistaken for a normal USB connection and potentially short out the keyboard, depending on how it's wired.  For this reason, they are not recommended for connecting split keyboards.  
```

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention the hotdox is passing.

Author: @yanfali the Hotdox uses USB, as well? 

I know that the Ergodox Infinity does. 

And the dactyl Manuform uses RJ-11 (which is the best, IMO)

Author: @yanfali the HotDox uses an IO expander chip, and not the split common code. 

Aka, it uses the Ergodox code.

Another option is to use phone cables (as in, old school RJ-11/RJ-14 cables). Make sure that you use one that actually supports 4 wires/lanes.  

However, USB cables, SATA cables, and even just 4 wires have been known to be used for communication between the controllers. 

!> Using USB cables for communication between the controllers works just fine, but the connector could be mistaken for a normal USB connection and potentially short out the keyboard, depending on how it's wired.  For this reason, they are not recommended for connecting split keyboards.  

### Serial Wiring

The 3 wires of the TRS/TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and D0 (aka PDO or pin 3) between the two Pro Micros. 

?> Note that the pin used here is actually set by `SOFT_SERIAL_PIN` below.

![serial wiring](https://i.imgur.com/C3D1GAQ.png)

### I<sup>2</sup>C Wiring

The 4 wires of the TRRS cable need to connect GND, VCC, and SCL and SDA (aka PD0/pin 3 and PD1/pin 2, respectively) between the two Pro Micros. 

The pull-up resistors may be placed on either half. It is also possible to use 4 resistors and have the pull-ups in both halves, but this is unnecessary in simple use cases.

> ![I<sup>2</sup>C wiring](https://i.imgur.com/Hbzhc6E.png)

Reviewer 2: This doesn't work:

![Screen Shot 2019-05-07 at 11 00 07 am](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4781841/57264790-517d4100-70b7-11e9-8b43-a57453d3bcab.png)

```suggestion
![I2C wiring](https://i.imgur.com/Hbzhc6E.png)
```

Or maybe the `²` character.

Author: /cries in i2c :D

If you want to use I<sup>2</sup>C to communicate between halves, you will need a cable with at least 4 wires and 2x 4.7kΩ pull-up resistors.

#### Considerations 

The most commonly used connection is a TRRS cable and jacks.  These provide 4 wires, making them very useful for split keyboards, and are easy to find. 

> However, since one of the wires carries VCC, this means that the boards are not hot pluggable. You should always disconnect the board from USB before unplugging and plugging in TRRS cables, or you can short the controller, or worse. 

Reviewer 2: What's a typical TRRS pinout look like? Are you telling me VCC is not on the sleeve? 😞

Reviewer 3: there's at least 2 variants. I know that  keebio changed  there's to something more logical or less likely to short. @nooges any insight you'd like to share?

Reviewer 2: I also just realised that even if VCC were on the sleeve you would still need to (un)plug the slave side first, otherwise you would be sending it VCC through the data or GND pins.

Author: Yup, exactly :(

This happens with my crkbd, and actually crashes the USB hub.  (my monitor) :(

And the way that @nooges has his set up, it's not as much of an issue, IIRC. But it can still happen.

Reviewer 5: Data lines are able to tolerate being shorted to vcc temporarily (especially when ground isn't present yet.)

The big issue with using a TRRS plug is that adjacent rings get temporarily shorted together as it is inserted, and if vcc and ground are kept on tip and sleeve (i.e. separated by one or more rings) then they should almost always stay isolated. Of course, it's quite likely inexperienced people will decide to do data-data-vcc-ground... D:

Author: @pelrun I hate to ask, but would you mind expanding upon that and adding that info here (or as a PR to my repo for this branch)?
